Morris, in reading about your biography, especially in the PW interview that you did a couple years ago.
You're from Vermont, and apparently you had a difficult childhood, but a modest childhood.
Can we, is it a superficial conclusion that
There's a lot of autobiographical resonance in this novel.
Well, the characters are certainly close to my family, and the circumstances are similar.
My mother and father were divorced.
My mother raised us.
I have three brothers in the book.
There are two brothers.
for a number of years.
Things were very tight and difficult in the family.
So it's close that way.
I've read where you start generally with characters or stories.
Are you more plot-driven or character-driven?
They're really close for me.
I know plot is
very much a dirty word with a lot of people, but it isn't with me.
It's really important, and so are the characters.
Okay, can you hear me now?
The characters, that's the most important thing.
Yeah, this is a big, about 700 pages?
Yeah, 740-something.
It's pretty good.
I mean, your first two books were not nearly as large as the... No, I...
I knew once I got started that it was going to be long, but no, I didn't start out with that in mind at all.
Well, I haven't counted.
Now, someone somewhere did write that.
I forgot where that was.
Yeah, I'd seen that, so I'm not sure how accurate that is, but it doesn't surprise me that there are that many.
I also understand that you're kind of vital with the suggestion that you write about the misfits in society.
But it is clear, however, that you do write about the less advantaged, so to speak.
Could you just explain a little bit about your interest in the kinds of characters that you write about?
Well, I can see where people would say that with the book Vanished.
Certainly, Aubrey Wallace was a misfit.
A dangerous woman the main character certainly was, Martha Horgan.
And I didn't use the word misfit, by the way, but others have.
Uh-huh.
No, I understand that.
But to suggest that that's all, you know— No, I would never suggest that.
Certainly you are.
I see kind of a—are you familiar with William Kennedy's work?
Uh-huh.
You know his book, Iron Weed?
There's an interesting parallel with that book.
And he had published three or four books prior to that, but he couldn't have a life with him to get that book published by anybody.
And what he said was, everybody indicated to him, who's interested in a bunch of low-lives, people who live in the gutter, people who are former alcoholics, who's interested in these people?
Fortunately for him, Saul Bellow wrote to Viking, and they gave another one, and I think it's one of the great books, you know, certainly over the last 20 black years.
But do you sense that people are not necessarily interested in the kinds, not interested, but it's hard to generate empathy for characters on the stage?
Well, I think the natural impulse for
readers for most people and most things is to want to be happy and want to escape from their problems and even in their reading and so if the characters are people with a lot of problems I can understand why a reader wouldn't necessarily want to
go looking for a book like that.
Especially this book, I don't see that the characters are primarily fringe people, the way the others are.
They're certainly experiencing difficult times, to be sure.
The central character certainly is not living a much life by any means, and there's certainly a lot of stress.
But I found that struggle that that character, Marie Fermoil, I found that a fascinating struggle.
How was it that you chose 1960 as a summer?
Well, that was easy, because in the summer of 1960, I was just graduating from high school myself.
I was seventeen, and I knew that time.
And I really do feel that it was an easier time in many respects.
I saw it as a real challenge on the one hand and also as a good
structurally a good way to do it because it kept the story tight.
It kept the focus on Marie Fermoil's goal to get this daughter into school, and that's primarily why.
A couple of your critics currently have pointed out that
It is kind of a thriller.
There is an element in here that does keep the reader involved as to what's going on.
Did you see this also as a kind of a thriller?
Well, that's always, again, to use the word challenge.
With the other two books as well, it has always seemed to me that you could write a very serious book.
and still make it entertaining.
You could still completely engage the reader if you did it well.
With the three books, do you see any interrelated, do you see an inconsistency, a thematic consistency for you?
Is it a business, in fact, a body of work for you, a corpus, or do you use the wrong words?
I wouldn't dare do that.
I think I'd be afraid I'd get too close to the flame and blow it out or something.
I don't know.
But there are certainly themes that you're concerned with.
And see, I think of people.
I go to, I find people's loneliness and yearning for love and the cruelties that people inflict upon one another.
Those are, that interest me.
And I don't really think in terms of themes.
I read that
I wish more authors did that, you know, that little statement of what the authors did.
I wish I had a good question.
But you use words with such as frailty and love.
Well, it was primarily in the—that began with how the book was structured in that it had no—there are no chapters in the book.
It's just really a series of one scene.
blending into another scene.
The different voices were very important to me that each scene, each character, would be written in the tone of the character's voice and the manner of the character's thoughts.
I didn't want chapters that had titles.
I wanted a sense for the reader that he was just kind of in this and swept along through it.
Do you rewrite a lot?
Yes, uh-huh.
I think this is, what, 44 years between books?
I think it's 88, 91.
Yes, between publishing, uh-huh.
Did this one take you longer to write, more time to write?
Yeah, this took me twice as long as far as the length of hours in a day.
You find that there's also the intensity of you.
Yes, because there were so many characters and so many stories, I had to stay with it much more.
I couldn't, even going away on a trip was difficult because when I came back, I'd have to completely reacquaint myself, start over almost.
And the longer I was away, it was just so hard getting back to it.
Do you live these books while you're writing them?
I suppose, in a sense, yeah.
Do you wake up with solutions to problems?
Oh, yeah, all of that.
Wake up with solutions, hear the voices in my head, walk along, realize that I'm kind of talking to myself.
But so many of these characters, I really...
I mean, they were original, the 51-year-old twins.
Oh, yeah, the Manka twins.
Uh-huh.
You know, you have priests and police chief office.
Is this a little town?
Of course, it is a fictional town, I believe.
It's not an actual town.
Jacksonville, Vermont, isn't it now?
I guess there's an Athens in New Hampshire, but I've never been there.
Well, yes, it's geographically set up much the way my hometown of Rutland, Vermont was.
Well, pretty close to Rutland, I think.
Yes, except that, of course, Rutland is the second largest city in Vermont.
It would be larger than no one refers to Rutland.
No one in that area refers to Rutland as a town.
But they think of themselves as a city by these standards here, around here, of course, as a town.
Yeah, but Rutland is a city, and I apologize for writing a simple word.
I don't mean to use the other observations of other reviewers, but I noticed one said that you're thieves of Catholicism.
Are these, in fact, the kinds of areas that you wanted to pursue?
They were just what the story was about, you know.
No, I didn't set out to attack Catholicism.
I didn't .
.
Well, I didn't use the word .
No, but it's been
pointed out to me and suggested that that's what I've done.
And no, I just, for me, the person as Father Gannon was first and foremost a troubled young man.
And of course what that does when one is a priest, how that can mess a lot of things up.
The issue of poverty is, again, just there.
It's just part of what that story's about.
Do you think that this really, that poverty or any other kind of hardship, does test the middle of a person, you know, the character?
Oh, definitely.
Definitely.
Maybe there's another reason why you choose to write about people under stress.
I don't know.
Mm-hmm.
Well, of course, it's just maybe the thing that, because I grew up with it, I'm more familiar with it.
I'm certainly comfortable with it, though.
You know, I noticed that, just like Mary Gordon has told me, and I've read a number of books, she feels so uncomfortable writing about men.
You don't seem to have that problem at all, I mean, by the way.
Oh, no, I don't.
And I wonder why, especially with your personal contact with the central character.
With the man, uh-huh.
That didn't intimidate you at all?
No, it didn't until afterwards it was pointed out to me that it was...
that I certainly had a lot of nerve doing it.
And I said, well, maybe you're right.
No, it didn't occur to me that I didn't see that.
To me, the challenge there was to tell that story through a very limited perspective of that particular character, not that he was male.
Artistically, was this book...
I knew I wanted to tell a particular story that had many aspects, many other stories as part of it.
The particular story being the story of the Fremoyle family.
And so for that reason, once I got started, yes, it was very much a challenge to keep all the voices straight and to make every story matter in relation to the main story.
Do you write in the work process?
Yes, I do now.
There's no way of knowing how many drafts there are of this book, right?
Right, right.
But I have a couple of huge boxes filled.
The manuscript was 1,200 pages, so just printing.
I'm sure you know then that every time it came off the word process, there it was.
And in fact, you know, the metaphor is always a baby, you know, giving birth.
Yeah.
And it weighed, in fact, nine pounds.
I'll never forget to actually weigh the manuscript.
Yeah.
It's not an easy thing to... Now, did you take yours with you when you would travel or... See, I would never do that.
There was too much to it.
In my case, I love...
Luke Gingrich, for instance, remember he was talking about this book, and he was welcome to the yard with his last thought.
He banged away.
I mean, my research fills this room for me to go and really work on something.
Now you have to teach.
There are pages where I might have different references.
It is a non-fiction book, but I really just wrote entirely in my little book.
Yeah, you'd have to.
It wasn't just coming off the top of your head.
Every one was opening, every sentence was opening up.
Just about all of the feature stories that have been written about you, the consistent theme is how you wrote in secrecy for all those years.
And it is interesting.
being a journalist, we jump on things like this, but did you, in fact, write in secrecy?
I really did.
It is fascinating.
I'm sorry to cover ground, but a lot of the papers I write for have never had features on you before, so we will revisit some of the areas if it's okay with you.
Oh, yes.
I don't have a problem admitting to my fetish now, but no, I was
unable to tell people it was part of it I think was because I wasn't published it seemed that to say I was writing people would think I was like everyone else who's writing and I think I feared that maybe I was like that too that I was just
I'd like to read, therefore I thought I could write.
And if I told people I wrote, then I was going to have to answer the question of, well, have you ever had anything published?
Have you tried to have anything published?
And it was just all too painful at that time to always be rejected whenever I sent anything out.
It was so much easier just to not talk about it and not, you know, to just do it quietly.
And you were acting as your own agent.
Oh, yes.
Sending it out to just a name.
I didn't know if the editor's name I had loved science fiction and hated everything else.
So you never went to LMP to look at the names?
Well, yes, I did.
But again, you don't get a huge amount of information about particular editors or anything.
So the break was getting an agent.
The break was exactly getting an agent, and her knowing which editor would like the type of work I was doing.
That was the difference.
That's wonderful that she liked the book, too.
It was pretty amazing that she liked the book, because nobody else did.
Was that, in fact, the first book that you had been working on over the twenty years of secrecy?
Were there many books?
Well, there were many different things that I had been writing, but that was the first book that I was determined that I would send out, and that I had worked on so much that I had
I finished it, and I knew it was complete, and I knew there was nothing more that could or had to be done on it.
And did it, in fact, get published pretty much the way you submitted it?
Just about.
Yeah, it is.
It's really amazing to me.
Does it feel a validation?
I guess I'm superstitious enough not to feel too much of one.
I'm just very grateful that it finally did happen or I'd still be writing away secretly, probably.
Would you think you would still be writing away?
I think so.
I think I'd be extremely unhappy, though, because I was getting deeper and deeper into my unhappiness.
It's very bewildering to do some one thing over and over again and not have anyone
want it or like it.
What was your family's reaction to your episode?
Very supportive.
My husband always was, and when I was most down about the whole thing, he would always seem to say the right thing, and the children were too.
As they got older, they would see that I—because sometimes I
There was one instance where I had a very devastating reply to the book, suggesting that it was just terrible work.
So they were old enough to say nice things.
Your views pretty much are always very positive.
But are you thin-skinned, and how do you respond?
Yes, I'm very thin-skinned.
I mean, does it drive you crazy the way it drives me?
And I think you can fume—not fume, but you can—how somebody can dismiss something in 200 words that somebody has been eight or nine years working on?
I don't think that there's much kindness that goes into it.
writing a review when you can do that to someone.
It always seemed to me that if you're going to—really, those kinds of reviews probably should be left to professional critics.
I can't imagine one writer doing that to another writer.
I'll never understand it.
As long as I live, I will never understand it.
I know, as a book review editor,
You know, I must have edited 5,000 reviews over the years.
And I would just never publish a mocking review.
I mean, if you're not supposed to say you'll kill, I would kill the reviewer.
I'd call the reviewer and say, I just can't publish this.
You're mocking this.
If you don't like the book, fine.
I'd say so in a respectful way.
Nothing outrages me more than a review of the flux per person.
I mean, if you have problems with it, express those problems in an expectful way.
I thought maybe I'd like to speak to myself in the right way, but I think you know what I'm about.
I don't know what to call it, the brouhaha tempest between Winston Groom and Michiko Kakutani.
Oh, I've missed that.
I'm following that.
It's very interesting.
Her parody is... Oh, I read the parody.
Oh, yeah.
Yes, he's been in the news a couple of times with his comments about her review.
personal text from him?
From him, he directed it.
Yeah, he was quoted as saying that it was a mean-spirited review, it was cruel, scathing, and that the difficulty was that there's really not much a writer can do when someone sets out to destroy them like that.
In his case, though, there's a lot of...
There's no question that he was cashing in on the liberty of this movie, too, I mean.
The popularity of Boris Gump.
You know, I don't imagine the thing could have hurt.
I mean, it wasn't even in the back of the section.
It jumped on the front page of the section.
Really?
I didn't read the parody.
I've only read his...
I have no problems saying in print how despicable I am, but Madonna's book was.
You can't even look at it in the bookstore.
They had plastic on it.
It was clearly an exploitive thing.
The book, of course, speaks for itself, and you'll forgive me if we really haven't talked about it, but it's my job to read it and talk about it, and I do try and combine .
.
Oh.
A little feature kind of thing.
I think your writing is extremely fun.
Oh, thanks, Nick.
Thank you so much.
I normally can read very quickly if I have to, but there are times when you want to slow down a little bit and enjoy it.
I've seen two numbers.
Advantage was rejected 20 times, is that right, or 27 times?
I think it was 27, something like that, yeah.
And you never gave up.
That's really... Well, I came close.
I mean, I really did.
I actually had declared that I would never send it out again and went through the...
formality of putting it in a box and taping it up and putting it up on a shelf.
Because every time it came back, it hurt the writing I was doing, because it made me wonder why I was doing this, why I was bothering.
Was it ever close to being picked up?
No.
Yes, and I wish I could think of, there was an editor of New York Times Book Review, and I cannot think of his name, and a relative of mine had met him and had told him about the book, and he said, oh, he was just fascinated, and he said, well, I know...
two people, and I'm going to send the name.
I wish I could think of his name.
Two days later, he was hit by a car.
That was about the close.
He was hit by a car in New York City.
It was a terrible tragedy on every level.
So what was your reaction finally when your agent called?
In the very end when she, it was just like a college acceptance in a way, the reverse.
So because it was a thin letter, I knew I wasn't getting the manuscript back.
So we had many stages in this process where she was looking at the
And the last letter she sent, because it was just a thin envelope, I just knew before I opened it that she was going to take the book.
My reaction was just to call everyone I knew.
Well, everyone who knew I was writing, not everyone I knew.
Then that was an interesting process to go through to tell people.
So what was the response of all these people who didn't know you were writing?
That was difficult for many people.
They were very pleased for me, but it was hard when you think you know someone and when you've gotten close to someone and there's this whole aspect of them that they haven't shared with you.
I'll tell you you did it the right way when we're done.
I'll tell you a little bit of my history, which is
I have your phone number in case I have any questions.
Oh, sure.
I'll transcribe it tomorrow, and if you don't mind, I'll give you a call.
Oh, no.
I'm leaving Sunday on the book tour.
That's the only thing.
Where are you going?
New York, Washington, Philadelphia, Seattle, things.
Chicago.
Are you going to Minneapolis?
Yeah.
Are you doing any interviews out there?
So Minneapolis takes me every once in a while if I have something in particular interest.
I may, I'm not sure if I have an interview.
I've got to check that.
I'll check it out.
Don't worry about that.
You are in New England all along your life, is that right?
Yeah, born in Connecticut and raised in Vermont.
Where in Connecticut?
Meriden.
Because I have New London and Manchester, too.
Oh, really?
No, I was— You were born in Merida?
Born in Merida, my mother and father.
My father was working there during the war years.
He was working one of those plants down there.
Well, Merida's not far from Manchester, right?
I love that.
Is that New London paper?
I'm so pleased to be in that.
Really?
Yeah, it's owned by a trust for the employees.
You know, it's only 40,000 or 50,000 in circulation.
They can indulge themselves in a call, and they love it.
Oh, that's great.
If I can give them a little local flavor, I'll do it.
And then, when did you move up to Vermont?
As a child.
We also lived in Brooklyn, New York.
Maybe three years, again, during the years when there was a lot of, my father then was, Borum and Peas was the company he worked for in Brooklyn, New York.
And then from there, when I was about, my parents separated when we lived in Brooklyn, and so I went back to Vermont about the age of five or six.
For a year I was sent back and lived with a relative, though.
I didn't—things were difficult.
Do you basically consider yourself from Vermont?
Because that's what I—yeah.
Does this sensibility work itself into your fiction, would you say, this regional affinity?
Well, certainly New England does.
Yeah, it's certainly—
And is your husband from New Orleans?
He is.
He grew up in Lawrence at Mance, and we live in the next town over now, Andover.
He's an attorney?
Yeah, his office is right around the corner from the house.
And you met him?
I was working one summer—it was the summer of my senior year in high school—at Hampton Beach.
I met him.
I was probably going to go to Hampton Beach at the same time.
Yeah, the summer of 1960 we met.
Well, I graduated high school in 61, and we used to go to Hampton Beach.
Oh, yeah.
That's a great place to go then, wasn't it, huh?
You haven't?
I really haven't.
I've gone to the Cape.
I haven't.
It's a different place.
It was a good high school hangout someplace.
It was.
I went to a college up in Maine.
Oh, my niece is there now.
In fact, my Greek sister-in-law, their daughter is there, Penny.
See, either one of my daughters want to go there.
Yeah.
No, she loves it.
Melanie's a very bright girl, and she's happy there.
I'll tell you, it's always great.
Mm-hmm.
I'll be back about...
For good, I'll be back October 2nd or 3rd, something like that.
So you're going to be back for a little while?
Yes, but if you did need to call me or anything, yeah, Patty Kelly would, yeah, and she would... I think that we pretty much have anything that you feel I should have that I don't.
I will.
How about the character of Omar?
You talked about a predator, right now.
Well, he was a character that, of course, I started with a Fermoil family and just knew them instantly, especially the character of my own father who was alcoholic, so the character of Sam Fermoil I knew so well.
But the minute I had Omar Duval, I was fascinated.
I felt myself
in his spell almost.
I was very fascinated by him and began to wonder, was he in me, was I in him?
There's also a biblical texture to it, isn't it?
He does come and he almost is.
Well, and he just knows what everyone needs.
He knows.
And yet he has so many of his own needs.
He has the need to be recognized and to be loved and to be successful himself.
And he just believes.
When he ever meets Roy Gold, he just totally believes in the whole presto soap.
package, and you would think that he wouldn't, but having— So you suggest that this character almost kind of took possession of you with some— I mean, I don't want to make it too— Well, but he— He affected you.
He was a very easy character to write.
As easy as the family members, he did speak to me.
I really enjoyed him as a character.
Is he just a character, or does he represent something for you?
I think what he came to represent, as I wrote it, was that wish, that hope that we always have.
someone will come and change our lives, whether it's the lottery ticket.
You know, you walk out of the store with the lottery ticket in your pocket and you think, whoa, I don't have to worry about much anymore as soon as I have my million dollars.
For me?
I was
I viewed Marie with a great deal of admiration and tenderness that she was so desirous of her children's success and that they be good people that she was willing to give up just about everything and anything but of course
It gets complicated when Omar devolves into her life because he represents both what she wants and what she's been willing to give up, too.
Would you kindly inscribe this for me?
Oh, I wrote this art from Yankee Magazine in front of me on the wall.
And we're talking about the dust jacket for the station.
Yeah.
And when the time came for the suggestions for the cover art, the publisher asked if I had any ideas.
usually they just pat you on the head and say, oh, yeah, nice idea.
But when they saw this, when I sent this to them, they were very excited and they really liked it right away.
And I especially like it because I remember, you know, these houses in the background and we could cut through the school beside one of them.
This reminds me of a couple of things.
We have a, and the town that I live in, Grafton has a,
bandstands like that.
It was put up when they were filming Our Wilderness, Eugene O'Neill, which was practical with film and graphic, so they built it.
It's there.
I don't know if you've ever been to Illumination Night in Oklahoma.
I've read about it.
I read Alice Hoffman.
Yeah, Alice has written about it.
One more question.
When you finally did, when your first book finally was published, not when it was sold, but
If you can just describe for me the feeling that you had when you finally saw that book and you finally got your first reading and people began to respond to it.
You're starting to hear from people I'm sure you've never heard from before.
People I hadn't heard from in years and years.
But also people writing to introduce themselves.
I had a letter today from a guy who's remembering the Baker Street Irregulars in Minnesota.
I have one chapter that's basically a mystery, and he's solving a mystery.
Sherlock Holmes dies.
It's a wonderful, wonderful thing.
But there must have been a euphoric.
Probably what sums it up for me is the first time I saw it in a bookstore, I was with my stepfather, and a shovel stick was there sooner than we thought it would be, and we said, oh, there it is.
I just...
I didn't want it to shrink away.
I was afraid to even pick it up.
I guess I thought everyone would know if they picked it up that it was in a book and I wouldn't know how to react.
I was so self-conscious about the whole thing.
That was late spring.
Was this up right back in Andover?
In Andover.
As it happens when a book comes out, it comes out and you accept.
symbols to be clashing, and the world to change, and suddenly there's the great silence that happens, and it's almost as if it didn't happen, and you're wondering what happened.
And then I received a call in the fall that had been nominated for the National Book Award, and that was very much out of the blue.
That was a shock to me.
So I went from that late May reaction, the great silence, and then into November, found myself one night in New York.
Joyce Carol Oates had me by the arms saying, Mary, Mary, come with me.
I want you to meet Ed, Ed, Ed.
Well, Ed turned out to yell Dr. Owen.
Yeah.
I interviewed him in this world hotel.
Really?
So it was an amazing, it really was an amazing humor.
Quite a stretch.
This is very nice.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.